---
title: On React props
publishedDate: 2024-01-20T13:00:00.000Z
---

Props are like the external APIs of your React components—they describe what needs to be passed in
and what comes out. It's like an instruction manual for your component that helps everyone
(including your future self) understand how to use it effectively.

I still remember the way the concept of APIs was described in the first university CS course I
attended. It was barely a few weeks after I'd written my first lines of code, and there was a
section on APIs—Application Programming Interfaces—in the course materials. The concept was
introduced with a simple yet memorable analogy: a hot dog stand.

### The hot dog stand analogy

The analogy goes like this:

- The API of the hot dog stand is the cashier window. The menu describes what you can get out of the
  hot dog stand (the outputs), and how much it costs (the inputs), and the window allows me to
  interact with the stand. As a customer, this is (mostly) what you care about.
- The implementation of the hot dog stand is the grill, the refrigerator, the staff heating up the
  buns, and so on. As long as the hot dog you get out is good, you don't _really care_ how any of
  this is organised.

Imagine if the hot dog stand didn't have an API at all. To figure out how to get a hot dog, you
would need to go behind the counter and check what kinds of buns are in the cupboards. You'd need to
open the refrigerator to see what sausages are available. You'd have to ask the cook to combine the
specific ingredients you want, as if they didn't even know what a hot dog is. This kind of hot dog
stand would feel absurdly unhelpful!

Even with how ridiculous that example feels, it's not exactly uncommon to have to do this when you
are working in a React codebase. Often, components have lazily designed or undocumented APIs (props
interfaces), and you end up having to open up the component and personally figure out how everything
works just to be able to use it.

In my humble opinion, APIs are the most important concept in programming. And by extension, props
interfaces are the most important thing when it comes to writing React. In this article, I want to
go through what I think are the key ideas to keep in mind when designing your props, so that you can
also build great APIs for your components.

# Keep the menu small

The easiest way to recognize a good restaurant is that they have a focused menu—they've chosen a
niche that they're really good at and have made a conscious choice to limit the number of different
dishes available. Why? Because they want to be able to make those few dishes really well.

On the other hand, we've all been to the Chinese restaurant on the corner, or the neighborhood kebab
place, only to be faced with a menu boasting sometimes hundreds of different options! As a
first-time _user_ of that restaurant, you would have a hard time filtering through all the noise to
figure out what it is that the restaurant actually does well.

When it comes to React, the same concept applies. Often a good React component is much like a good
restaurant—it solves a specific niche, and it solves it really well. Even still, over time even good
React components face pressure to start expanding their niche—to start solving problems that they
weren't initially designed for.

In a situation like that, it would be wise to pause for a moment and think: should this restaurant
really expand its menu, or would it perhaps be wiser to open up an entirely new restaurant to serve
the new requirements?

# Explain the fancy lingo

Sometimes when you read the menu of a nice restaurant, it's full of all kinds of fancy culinary
lingo describing the contents. To avoid making a complete fool out of yourself, you pretend like you
know exactly what _Chiffonade_ and _Escabeche_ are, and confidently order your meal — only to later
be surprised that it's actually not at all what you wanted to eat.

I see this sometimes in programming as well. Developers have a tendency to feel like they have no
choice but to use the fanciest possible words to name things. And in many cases, they don't realize
the importance of adding helpful documentation that would describe what that thing actually is and
what it does. For example, like this:

```tsx
export const getFeed = (args: { smoothingConstant?: number }) => {
	//...
};
```

This kind of code creates more questions than it answers: What is a "smoothing constant"? What kinds
of values are expected? How does this affect the output?

Instead, a well-documented API for this function could look, for example, like this:

```tsx
export const getFeed = (args: {
	/**
	 * The smoothing constant is a number between 0 and 1, which influences the randomness of the results.
	 *
	 * A high smoothing constant reduces the impact of the ranking criteria, making the results more random.
	 * A low smoothing constant increases the impact of the ranking criteria, making the results less random.
	 *
	 * @see {@link https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_smoothing} for more details
	 *
	 * @default 0.5
	 */
	smoothingConstant?: number;
}) => {
	//...
};
```

It's ok to use fancy lingo - sometimes that's the most accurate way to describe a thing. But it's
important to always assume the users of your code know nothing, and make a habit of explaining
things thoroughly. Writing this kind of documentation takes at most a minute, but could save an hour
of someone else's time. And: if you use something like GitHub Copilot, writing this kind of
documentation is often a matter of just creating an empty comment and pressing tab to accept the
suggestion.

# Stick to conventions

It's a good idea to write your component APIs in a way that is immediately familiar to someone who
opens it for the first time.

I'll admit I'm starting to struggle with these restaurant analogies a bit, but let's give it a shot.
Imagine opening a restaurant menu that just ignored all existing conventions for how menus usually
work. As a customer, you would have a really hard time figuring out what to order!

How this relates to React, though, is that following conventions is a really powerful tool to make
your component APIs quick and easy to understand.

### Using `value` and `onChange` for the input/output props of a controlled component

Sometimes I come across code where there has been an attempt to come up with more "contextual"
naming for these props - like for example a date picker component might use `date` and
`onDateChange`, a text field might use `text` and `onTextChange`. In my opinion, this is not at all
necessary: if you are using TypeScript (and you definitely should be), the types already describe
what the type of the value is: `value: Date` conveys just as much information as `date: Date`. And
if you make a convention out of this sort of contextual naming, more complex types can easily lead
to quite obtuse naming like:

```tsx
export interface DatePickerProps {
	dateAndTime: string;
	onDateAndTimeChange: (dateAndTime: string) => void;
}
```

When you combine this kind of naming with all of the different props that a component might take in,
it sometimes becomes a bit difficult to even figure out what are the props that control the _main
value_ of the component. In this kind of case, a much clearer props interface would be something
like this:

```tsx
export interface DatePickerProps {
	value: DateTime;
	onChange: (value: DateTime) => void;
}
```

### Be consistent with naming

This is a small thing, but it's good to make a conscious decision how you want to name certain kinds
of props, so that they convey their purpose in the best possible way.

For example, a prop used to disable an input could be named either `disabled` or `isDisabled`. Both
of these certainly work, and there are examples of both being used by popular React libraries.

In some cases though, a less verbose convention like `disabled` may run into issues. Imagine a
component that takes in a prop named `footer`, which is a boolean flag indicating whether to render
a footer or not. Based on the naming alone, it could easily be confused with a prop where I should
in fact pass in the React component to use as the footer. Instead, if the convention in the codebase
was that boolean props _always_ use a naming convention like `isDisabled` or `hasFooter`, it would
be much easier to understand what the purpose of the `footer` prop is.

There's no one right answer to this, except: pick a convention, and try to be consistent with it
across your codebase.

# Be specific

Ok, last one. No more restaurant analogies after this, I promise.

So we've all seen this in a menu at least once:

**"Served with potatoes"**

What do you mean "potatoes"? Is it french fries? Baked potatoes? Pan-friend potatoes? _Mashed
potatoes_?? Surely there's some more specific description of the potatoes you could have given me...

In Typescript, this kind of confusion happens when you're too wide with your typing. Going back to
our date picker example, we could imagine it having a prop to control how the selected value is
formatted:

```tsx
export interface DatePickerProps {
	value: DateTime;
	onChange: (value: DateTime) => void;
	format: string;
}
```

Just looking at the props interface here, it's not very clear what a valid value for the `format`
prop looks like. We could improve this by adding some JSDoc and maybe a link to some external
documentation which includes a list of all valid formats, but the problem still remains - Typescript
will allow the developer to pass in all kinds of invalid values because the prop is typed as just
`string`.

In most cases, you will probably have a pretty small set of _intended_ values for a prop like this,
so it would be a lot more useful if it would instead be typed something like:

```tsx
format: 'mm/dd/yyyy' | 'mm/yyyy' | 'mm/dd';
```

When designing the types interface of a component, your goal should be to allow the Typescript
compiler to help the user avoid passing in the wrong kinds of values, as much as possible.

If you're new to Typescript, this might at first seem like you're making it harder to use your
component. But in fact, it's the opposite: by making it harder to use the component in the wrong
way, you're making it easier to use it _in the right way_.

# Closing thoughts

In the end, well-designed props are the foundation of a great React component. By keeping your prop
interfaces simple, well-documented, and consistent, you'll make your components more intuitive and
easier to use — both for yourself and for others. Remember, a bit of extra thought in your prop
design today can save hours of debugging and frustration tomorrow.
